=head1 NAME

dnstop - displays various tables of DNS traffic on your network.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

dnstop [-46apsQR] [-b expression] [-i address] [-f filter] [-r interval] [device] [savefile]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

dnstop is a small tool to listen on device or to parse the file savefile and collect and print statistics on the local network's DNS traffic. You must have read access to /dev/bpf*.

=head1 COMMAND LINE OPTIONS

The options are as follows:

=item B<-4>

Count only messages with IPv4 addresses.

=item B<-6>

Count only messages with IPv6 addresses.

=item B<-a>

Anonymize addresses.

=item B<-b expression>

BPF filter expression (default: udp port 53).

=item B<-i address>

Ignore select addresses.

=item B<-p>

Do not put the interface into promiscuous mode.

=item B<-r>

Redraw interval (seconds).

=item B<-l level>

Keep counts on names up to level domain name levels.

For example, with -l 2 (the default), dnstop will keep two tables: one with top-level domain names, and another with second-level domain names. Increasing the level provides more details, but also requires more memory and CPU.

=item B<-f>

Input filter name

The "unknown-tlds" filter includes only queries for TLDs that are bogus. Useful for identifying hosts/servers that leak queries for things like "localhost" or "workgroup."

The "A-for-A" filter includes only A queries for names that are already IP addresses. Certain Microsoft Windows DNS servers have a known bug that forward these queries.

The "rfc1918-ptr" filter includes only PTR queries for addresses in RFC1918 space. These should never leak from inside an organization.

=item B<-Q>

Count only DNS query messages.

=item B<-R>

Count only DNS reply messages.

=item B<savefile>

A captured network trace in pcap format.

=item B<device>

Ethernet device (ie fxp0).

=head1 RUN TIME OPTIONS

While running, the following options are available to alter the display:

=item B<s>

Display the source address table.

=item B<d>

Display the destination address table.

=item B<t>

Display the breakdown of query types seen.

=item B<o>

Display the breakdown of opcodes seen.

=item B<1>

Show 1st level query names.

=item B<2>

Show 2nd level query names.

=item B<3>

Show 3rd level query names.

=item B<4>

Show 4th level query names.

=item B<5>

Show 5th level query names.

=item B<6>

Show 6th level query names.

=item B<7>

Show 7th level query names.

=item B<8>

Show 8th level query names.

=item B<9>

Show 9th level query names.

=item B<!>

Show sources + 1st level query names.

=item B<@>

Show sources + 2nd level query names.

=item B<#>

Show sources + 3rd level query names.

=item B<$>

Show sources + 4th level query names.

=item B<%>

Show sources + 5th level query names.

=item B<^>

Show sources + 6th level query names.

=item B<&>

Show sources + 7th level query names.

=item B<*>

Show sources + 8th level query names.

=item B<(>

Show sources + 9th level query names.

=item B<^R>

Reset the counters.

=item B<^X>

Exit the program.

=item B<space>

Redraw.

=item B<?>

Help.

=head1 NON-INTERACTIVE MODE

If stdout is not a tty, dnstop runs in non-interactive mode. In this case, you must supply a savefile for reading, instead of capturing live packets. After reading the entire savefile, dnstop prints the top 50 entries for each table.

=head1 AUTHORS

=item B<Duane Wessels (wessels@measurement-factory.com)>

=item B<Mark Foster (mark@foster.cc)>

=item B<Jose Nazario (jose@monkey.org)>

=item B<Sam Norris E<lt>@ChangeIP.comE<gt>>

=item B<Max Horn E<lt>@quendi.deE<gt>>

=item B<John Morrissey E<lt>jwm@horde.netE<gt>>

=item B<Florian Forster E<lt>octo@verplant.orgE<gt>>

=item B<Dave Plonka E<lt>plonka@cs.wisc.eduE<gt>>

=item B<http://dnstop.measurement-factory.com/>

=head1 BUGS

Does not support TCP at this time.
