.\" pkg-get.1m 2009/05/29
.TH PKG-GET 1m "May 29th, 2009" "Phil\'s Software"
.SH NAME
pkg-get 4.x \- automatic install and upgrade of packages over the network

.SH SYNOPSIS
 pkg-get [modifiers] {-i|install}  {pkgname [...]|all}
 pkg-get [modifiers] {-d|download} {pkgname [...]|all}
 pkg-get [modifiers] {-u|upgrade}   [pkgname...] 
 pkg-get [modifiers] {-c|compare} | {-a|available}
 pkg-get [modifiers] -e email.address
 pkg-get [modifiers]  -D [regexp to search for]
 pkg-get {-l|list}
 pkg-get [...] {-i|-d|-u|-c} {/dir/} {pkgname[...]|all}

.SH MODIFIERS
 -U|updatecatalog
 -s url://temp.site/path
 -S|sync
 -v
 -f

.SH DESCRIPTION

pkg-get is similar to Debian Linux "apt-get". Its most basic use is that you
tell it the name of a software package, and it automatically goes and grabs it
from the net, then installs it on your system. It also has an upgrade mode 
that installs newer versions of software you have installed, if available.

In version 2.0, optional checksum support has been added. If the remote site 
has md5 hashes for files, and you have either md5 or gmd5sum in your PATH,
downloaded files will be checked against the catalog's hash.
Additionally, if you try to re-download a file you already have, and it matches 
the checksum, it will skip the download of that specific file as unneccessary.

.SH MODES
.TP
pkg-get available

will show you a list of freeware packages available to install

.TP
pkg-get describe {pkgname, or partial name}

will show you descriptions of one, or all, packages available

.TP
pkg-get -e email@addr

will email the given address, If and Only If there are out of date packages
installed

.TP
pkg-get install {pkgname [pkgname...] | all}

will install listed packages. If 'all' is specified, will install all 
packages available, at the latest version.
.TP
pkg-get upgrade [pkgname [pkgname...]]

will automatically upgrade the listed packages to the latest version.
If no arguments, will upgrade all packages that are already installed.

The upgrade option will remove any older versions of packages for you. It will
also automatically choose the highest revision of a package to download, if
there are multiple available.

.TP
pkg-get {cmd} /dir/path  {pkgname [pkgname...] | all}

If you specify a directory path as your first "package", then pkg-get will
switch into local directory mode. It will treat the specified directory as the
package repository, with the important difference that packages must be in 
"file system format". This is the format that packages are distributed in,
on the Solaris 8, 9, and 10 OS disks. Not coincidentally, this is primarily
what this mode is for :) So for example,

pkg-get install /cdrom/*/Solaris*/Product SUNWfirefox

will pull in the firefox package, along with any needed dependancies from that
location


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
-U|updatecatalog
Grabs the latest catalog from the site before doing anything else. May be used 
as a command by itself.
All "compare versions" operations are done on the locally cached copy of the
catalog.
pkg-get will automatically update the catalog if it is older than a month.

.TP
-d|download
Downloads the pkg file, and does NOT install. Useful if you're trying to
create a local archive of pkg files
.TP
-v
This is only meaningful for the 'install' option, without arguments.
It adds "verbose" mode, to tell you what would be upgraded.
 BUT... it stops the program actually downloading any newer files!
.TP
-i|install [softwarename]
Looks through all packages you have installs, and compares them to the
latest available on the site. If the site has newer versions, it will
download and install all newer versions of software you already have.
It will NOT install packages you do not already have installed.

If you specify a particular software name, it will first
look up the specific software name in the local contents cache.
If you already have the same version installed, says so and quits.
Otherwise, if it is available, pkg-get will download and install it.
.TP
-u|upgrade
Attempts to upgrade any installed packages that have newer versions 
available on the site.
.TP
-S|sync
When in upgrade mode, tells pkg-get to sync pacakges to the version of the
package on the software site, reguardless of whether it is newer or older,
than what is installed.
.B Warning:
This may not always work cleanly, if dependancies in the locally installed
package are radically different from ones for the older version on the
software site. But generally speaking, it should work well as a "revert to
earlier state" tool.
.TP
-a|available
This just prints out the software name and revision of all packages
available for download. It is automatically piped to "more" or similar pager.
.TP
-D|describe
Prints out longer descriptions of software, if available.
Can take a regular expression as an argument, to only print out lines that
match the regular expression.
.TP
-c|compare
Display a comparision of versions between installed packages, and what is
available on the site. If you do not have a package installed, it will
show "not installed" for the local version stamp.
.TP
-l|list
Print out a software-name based list of all installed packages that pkg-get
recognizes from the current catalog. This is useful if you want to duplicate
the same installed packages on a first machine, to another machine, via
pkg-get install `cat list`
.TP
-f
Force default action on pkg add or remove; Dont ask questions.
This may mean that it will refuse to install some packages, depending on what
the pkgadd defaults are, whether there are conflicts, etc.
The 'normal' defaults are specified in /var/sadm/install/admin/default.
See the "MORE AUTOMATION" section at the bottom of this manpage.
.TP
-r|remove
This option was added by request. However, it is inherently not as bulletproof
as the other options,
because nothing in the site catalog says that the pkg version and the software
version have to match. However, it should work as expected 95% of the time.
And worst case, it will ONLY remove packages that are on the remote site
catalog; It should not remove Solaris packages.
.TP
-s
Sets a new "site" url to download from, overriding "url=" definition in
pkg-get.conf. It is permissible to use file:/// syntax for local directories
with valid catalogs. (Must give full pathname!) Otherwise, specify a directory 
name, for a directory with raw packages in directory format 
(as on a solaris install cdrom)

.SH PROXIES
See /opt/csw/etc/pkg-get.conf for comments on how to use wget behind a proxy.
Basically, just export the environment variables http_proxy and ftp_proxy.
The conf file lets you do that without messing with users' environments 
directly.

.SH MORE AUTOMATION
If you dont like answering pkgadd prompts, you can create an 'admin' file, as
/var/pkg-get/admin

A sample 100% hands-off admin file is provided, as
/opt/csw/share/doc/pkg-get/admin-fullauto. 
You may cp the file to /var/pkg-get/admin.
Be sure to not symlink it!

pkg-get will then no longer give you warnings about
setuid installscripts, conflicts, and other issues.
However, it may still ask you in some instances,
"Do you want to install/remove this package",
unless you use the -f option to pkg-get. Contrariwise, if you use
-f without overriding the defaults, pkg-get will presume a "n" answer
to that question, and potentially not install a 
considerable amount of packages.

For full details of the format of the admin file, man -s4 admin.

Even further automation is possible, by providing "pkgask" files, on a
package by package basis. If the file
/var/pkg-get/pkgask/[CSWpkgname] exists, it will be fed to pkgadd, as
a response file. (See the pkgadd manpage). pkg-get will also check for a 
"global" file, /opt/csw/etc/pkgask/[CSWpkgname]

.SH FILES
 /etc/opt/csw/pkg-get.conf
 /opt/csw/etc/pkg-get.conf
 /var/pkg-get/catalog-sitename
 /var/pkg-get/admin
 /var/pkg-get/admin-fullauto
 /var/pkg-get/pkgask
 /opt/csw/etc/pkgask

.SH FILES FOR HOMEDIR MODE
 $HOME/.pkg-get (equivalent of pkg-get.conf)
 $HOME/pkg-get  (equivalent of /var/pkg-get)

.SH BUGS

I wouldn't be surprised if there are one or two bugs to be worked out. If so,
please email me about them!

.SH SEE ALSO
If you are interested in setting up your own local freeware server,

 http://www.bolthole.com/solaris/makecontents 

is the tool needed to automatically generate the catalog for each directory.
[Unfortunately, it is currently the "old format", however]


.SH AUTHOR
Philip Brown
 phil@bolthole.com
 http://www.bolthole.com/solaris/

